---
course_id: 21l-011-the-film-experience-fall-2013
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 4d8da5010091ab4e31fd9e0497b551ec
    name: Lecture Videos & Notes
    weight: 60
title: Lecture Videos & Notes
type: course
uid: 4d8da5010091ab4e31fd9e0497b551ec

---

This page compiles lecture content from several versions of the class:

*   Lecture outlines by Prof. Thorburn, from 2013.
*   Detailed notes taken by a student, from 2006.
*   A complete sequence of lecture videos, assembled from the 2007 and 2013 classes.

Please note there will be some inconsistencies among the materials from the different years, reflecting continued refinement in the course. For instance, the 2006 student notes end with the lecture on DeSica's _Bicycle Thieves_, and do not cover these aspects of the 2013 class as reflected in the videos and lecture outlines:

*   Howard Hawks was added to the 2nd "Hollywood in the 1930s" session (lecture 8).
*   _Rear Window_ was added to the 2nd Hitchcock session (lecture 10).
*   Truffaut's _The 400 Blows_ and Kurosawa's _Rashomon_ are discussed in lectures 21 and 22.

Lecture Outlines (2013)
-----------------------

[Prof. Thorburn's Fall 2013 lecture outlines (PDF)]({{< baseurl >}}/sections/lecture-videos-notes/mit21l_011f13_lec_outlines)

Lecture Notes by a Student (2006)
---------------------------------

[Compiled lecture notes taken by a student in 2006 (PDF - 1.1MB)]({{< baseurl >}}/sections/lecture-videos-notes/mit21l_011f13_2006_notes)

Lecture Videos
--------------{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-1-introduction-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 1: Introduction (2007)" description="Description : Introducing film as a cultural form, an institution and an art. Beginning as a novelty without conventions, film developed a unique language and grew into an embedded social norm. Examples: Fred Otts Sneeze, Great Train Robbery. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/LFOsw1Vccac/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-2-keaton-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 2: Keaton (2007)" description="Description : Continues the discussion of the evolution of early film, centering on D.W. Griffith and Buster Keaton, whose 1927 masterpiece The General is seen as a culmination of the Silent Era. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/vpJba2qIXjs/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-3-chaplin-part-i-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 3: Chaplin, Part I (2007)" description="Description : Explore the emergence of Charlie Chaplin during the early years of Hollywood. Examples: Keystone Kops, The Tramp. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/m4ZuXay_qOo/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-4-chaplin-part-ii-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 4: Chaplin, Part II (2007)" description="Description : Continue discussion of Charlie Chaplin, comparing his films to those of Buster Keaton. Examples: Keatons Cops, Chaplins The Gold Rush, City Lights, and particularly Modern Times. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/0jWfHFBLnv0/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-5-film-as-global-cultural-form-montage-mise-en-scene" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 5: Film as Global & Cultural Form; Montage, Mise en Scène" description="Description : Film emerges as a global cultural form. Compare American vs. European cinemas, Hollywood vs. high art, and montage vs. mise en scène styles. End with viewing and discussing the Odessa Steps montage in Eisensteins Battleship Potemkin. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/r67dVaGtBGA/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-6-german-film-murnau" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 6: German Film, Murnau" description="Description : Continue discussing film as a global cultural form through early German cinema. Establish key themes of German Expressionism, with paintings as a backdrop. View & discuss clips: The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari, Metropolis, Nosferatu. Preview The Last Laugh. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/BgozyEIGsuc/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-7-the-studio-era" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 7: The Studio Era" description="Description : Emergence of Hollywood system of stars and genres, producing populist aesthetics of connection with the mass moviegoing audience. Three strains of comedy: Anarchic, worldly, & screwball.  View & discuss two screwball clips: The Lady Eve & Ball of Fire. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/NOT1VZrNkMo/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-8-the-work-of-movies-capra-hawks" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 8: The Work of Movies; Capra & Hawks" description="Description : Continue discussion of the Hollywood Studio Era of 1930s-1940s. Explore cultural implications of film as entertainment and as consensus narrative. Survey careers of Capra and Hawks, and preview their films It Happened One Night and His Girl Friday. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/ilM34q8F6rY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-9-alfred-hitchcock" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 9: Alfred Hitchcock" description="Description : Hitchcocks style dovetails with the Hollywood systems imposed contstraints. Survey his career (Silent Era through the 1960s) and method as a fastidious technician. Clip from Strangers on a Train demonstrates key themes like confinement and authority. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/vtViG3o2mgg/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-10-shadow-of-a-doubt-rear-window" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 10: Shadow of a Doubt, Rear Window" description="Description : Shadow of a Doubt and Rear Window show how Hitchcock films can be considered a genre all their own. Themes include divided self (good/evil, masculine / feminine), attractiveness of evil, nature of cinema entertainment, double plots (story & meta-story). Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/xt_0iNlUQ2U/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-11-the-musical" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 11: The Musical" description="Description : Define what makes a film a musical.  Key themes: creating community and putting on the show, high vs popular culture, social class vs merit, restraint vs spontaneity. Films discussed: Love Me Tonight, 42nd Street, Top Hat. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/mPCTR32vxWo/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-12-the-musical-continued" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 12: The Musical (continued)" description="Description : Compare and contrast the dance styles of Fred Astaire and Gene Kelly, and their contributions to the musical genre. Discuss in detail the films Singin in the Rain (1952) and Cabaret (1972). The course theme of multiplicity in art and film returns. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/tHttGDNmgKI/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-13-the-western" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 13: The Western" description="Description : The Western as a genre form, exemplifying Hollywood cinemas emergence as a central form of storytelling (consensus narrative) for the founding myths of the United  States. Example: McCabe and Mrs. Miller. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/wAojFJTmsxE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-14-the-western-continued" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 14: The Western (continued)" description="Description : Conclude discussion of the Western as genre form. The Westerns role in movie house culture and Saturday matinees. Surveys key films and themes by decade, from silent films to today; overview of John Fords career and preview of The Searchers. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/oocw6x_kCQs/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-15-american-film-in-the-1970s-part-i-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 15: American Film in the 1970s, Part I (2007)" description="Description : Dramatic changes in American film of the late 60s & early 70s linked with the periods turbulent social history, and with TV supplanting film as the medium for consensus narrative. Discuss Jack Nicholson / Five Easy Pieces; Altmans The Long Goodbye, MASH. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/BWLwSqLZd2o/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-16-american-film-in-the-1970s-part-ii-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 16: American Film in the 1970s, Part II (2007)" description="Description : Continue the discussion of transformation and subversion in 1970s films, specifically as embodied in the work of director Robert Altman. Detailed preview of McCabe and Mrs. Miller, and consider High Noon as a baseline Western reference. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/j-F3Sy1nxPA/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-17-jean-renoir-and-poetic-realism" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 17: Jean Renoir and Poetic Realism" description="Description : Parallels between French and American cinema, and French contribution to developing film theory and criticism. Survey Renoirs career and some key associates (Vigo, Bazin). Analyze short clips from Grand Illusion and Boudu Saved From Drowning. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/WsEPhUu8kKU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-18-renoirs-grand-illusion-1937" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 18: Renoirs Grand Illusion (1937)" description="Description : Rules of the Game demonstrates Renoirs camera technique. Discuss key actors (Von Stroheim, Gabin) and key themes including prison camp as microcosm, transcending barriers, effects of social class, Europe in transition. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/eO3RNUAFtDE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-19-italian-neorealism-part-i-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 19: Italian Neorealism, Part I (2007)" description="Description : Origins and historical context of Italian neorealism, with brief accounts of the major figures and artistic principles of the movement. Discuss the quality of multiplicity, a key attribute of all good films. Examples: Bicycle Thieves; Rome, Open City. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Fq0mvAbzUrY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-20-italian-neorealism-part-ii-2007" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 20: Italian Neorealism, Part II (2007)" description="Description : A general account of De Sicas career as an actor and director, and a close reading of his most famous film Bicycle Thieves. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/HypQZfQPtYk/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-21-truffaut-the-nouvelle-vague-the-400-blows" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 21: Truffaut, the Nouvelle Vague, The 400 Blows" description="Description : Introduce the French New Wave style, with comparisons to Italian neorealism and Hollywood, and use of improvisation, jump cuts, elliptical editing, and self-reflexiveness. Focus on Truffaut and his key films, especially The 400 Blows. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/flAwb1TmOkQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-22-kurosawa-and-rashomon" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 22: Kurosawa and Rashomon" description="Description : Kurosawas Rashomon demonstrates films emergence as an international medium and fully-recognized art form. The lecture highlights connections to modernism and Japanese theater traditions, and summarizes the films key stylistic and structural features. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/6B8FySbsUsM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos-notes/lecture-23-summary-perspectives-film-as-art-and-artifact" section="Lecture Videos & Notes" title="Lecture 23: Summary Perspectives - Film as Art and Artifact" description="Description : A review and summary of the key themes of this course, such as consensus narrative, organic form, and the multiplicity principle. Instructor : David Thorburn See the Video Index tab for a chapter outline of this lecture and links to view each chapter." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/lbtrbE_kK_Q/default.jpg" >}}